# Enhanced Artifact Management in Agent Protocol

| Feature name  | Artifact Management Enhancement              |
| :------------ | :------------------------------------------ |
| **Author(s)** | Craig Swift [(@TechySwift)](https://twitter.com/TechySwift) & Nicholas Tindle [(@NickTindle)](https://twitter.com/nicktindle)|
| **RFC PR:**   |                                            |
| **Updated**   | 2023-08-15                                 |
| **Obsoletes** | Previous Artifact Management AP-RFC         |

## Summary

The proposal seeks to refine the artifact handling system in the agent protocol to provide greater flexibility and clarity. We aim to achieve this by allowing specific file upload paths, distinguishing between agent-generated and input artifacts, and by revisiting the current implementation.

## Motivation

The agent's capacity to manage artifacts efficiently and flexibly is crucial for its operation. The current mechanism has limitations, especially when considering diverse storage solutions and the need to identify the source of artifacts. Ensuring that the protocol can handle these challenges is essential for its scalability and utility.

## Agent Builders Benefit

- **Robust Artifact Management**: Agents will have a more resilient and flexible system to handle artifacts, thereby reducing potential errors and inefficiencies.
- **Clear Artifact Source Identification**: It will be easier to trace the source of artifacts, enhancing traceability and auditing capabilities.
- **Unopinionated**: Unopinionated agent class design will allow developers to implement their desired artifact handling mechanisms.

## Design Proposal

1. **Flexible Upload Paths**: 
    - Allow agents to specify where files are uploaded from, accommodating external storage solutions such as AWS S3.
    - Make relative path an optional parameter and mark it to be removed
    - Add a URI parameter as an optional parameter
    - Make file an optional parameter
    - Require either URI or file to be specified
    - Add an endpoint to the agent protocol to list the URI protocols that are valid for input and output for agents

2. **Artifact Source Identification**:
    - Introduce a mechanism, possibly via metadata, to discern if an artifact is generated by the agent or if it's an input.
    
3. **Revise Current Implementation**:
    - Modify POST /agent/tasks/<task_id>/artifacts’s file parameter type from string to multipart/form-data 
    - Remove current artifact handling logic from agent class
    - Require a handler function in the same way the task and step handler functions are required. This will allow agent developers to implement their desired artifact handling mechanisms.


### Alternatives Considered

- **Maintain Current Implementation**: While this ensures stability, it doesn't address the limitations faced by the agent developers.
- **Batteries Included Approach**: Add the to the protocol a complete artifact handling mechanism. This will make the protocol more opinionated and more complex. Moving away from the original design goals of providing an protocol rather than an implementation.

### Compatibility

- Changes to the artifact class will only add additional fields with defaults set to preserve backward compatibility.
- Removing the current artifact handling logic will break compatibility with existing agents.

## Detailed Design (Optional)

1. **Enhanced Artifact Class**:
    - Retain the existing `Artifact` and `ArtifactUpload` classes.
    - Incorporate attributes to identify artifact source (e.g., `sourceType` with possible values: 'input' or 'output').
    - Provide methods/functions to specify external upload paths.
  
2. **Remove Artifact and Workspace Handling form Agent Class**:
    - Remove the opinionated artifact and workspace handling logic from the agent class.

3. **Require artifact upload and download handler functions**: 
    - Require handler functions for artifact upload and download, which can be called form the protocol artifact endpoints.

## Questions and Discussion Topics

- Do we want to keep the artifact handling logic out of the agent protocol?
